---
title: "CS3530 2023-08-30"
date: 2023-08-30T08:07:47Z
draft: false
toc: true
---

## Conditional GET

1. The goal of this request is to NOT send object if cache has up-to-date version of the object.
2. The client will specify date of cached copy in HTTP request header `If-modified-since: <date>`
3. Server response contains no object if cached copy is upto date with `HTTP/1.0 304 Not Modified`.
4. If object is modified after `<date>`, the response is of the form `HTTP/1.0 200 OK` and the object is sent.

## HTTP/2

1. The key goal is to decrease delay in multi-object HTTP delays.
2. HTTP/1.1 introduced _multiple pipelined GET_ requests over single TCP connection.
    - Server responds _in-order_ (FCFS) to GET requests.
    - With FCFS, sending small objects may have to wait for transmission, called **Head-of-Line (HOL) blocking**.
    - Loss recovery (retransmitting lost TCP segments) stalls object transmission.

3. HTTP/2 increases flexibility at _server_ in sending objects to client.
    - Most headers, status codes unchanged.
    - Order of transmission of requested objects based on _client-specified_ order priority.
    - _push_ unrequested objects to client.
    - divide objects into frames, schedule frames to mitigate HOL blocking.

### Mitigation of HOL Blocking

1. In HTTP/2, objects are divided into frames, and frame transmission is _interlieaved_.
2. Reduces delays, increases throughput.

### HTTP/2 to HTTP/3

1. HTTP/2 over single TCP connection:
    - Recovery from packet loss still stals all transmissions.
    - No security over vanilla TCP connection.
2. HTTP/3 adds _security_, per object error-and-congestion control (more pipelining) over _UDP_.
    - TCP functionality in the _kernel_ implemented in the _user_ level.

## E-mail

It contains three major components:
1. User agent
    - Known as a _mail reader_.
    - Used to compose, edit, read email.
    - Outgoing, incoming messages are stored in servers.
    - Examples include Gmail, Outlook.
2. Mail servers 
    - **Mailbox** contains incoming messages for user.
    - **Message queue** for outgoing mail.
3. Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
    - _Client_ is sending mail server.
    - _Server_ is receiving mail server.

### SMTP RFC

1. Uses TCP to reliably transfer email message from client to server port 25.
2. Three phases:
    - SMTP handshaking (greeting).
    - SMTP transfer of messages
    - SMTP closure
3. Has command/response interacton (like HTTP status/message code).

### SMTP Observations

1. Comparison with HTTP:
    - HTTP: client _pull_ (consumer)
    - SMTP: client _push_ (producer)

### Retrieving E-mail

1. **SMTP**: Delivery/storage of e-mail messages to receiver's server.
2. **IMAP (Internet Mail Access Protocol)** or **POP (Post Office Protocol)** is used to retrieve emails.

## DNS

1. IP addresses are used to address datagrams, while names are used by humans.
2. **Domain Name System (DNS)** is a _distributed database_ implemented in the hierarchy of _name servers_. They map IP address to name and vice versa.
3. DNS is application-layer protoocl.

### DNS Services

1. Hostname to IP address translation
2. Host aliasing
3. Mail server aliasing
4. Load distribution
    - replicated web servers, many IP addresses correspond to one name.
5. Why not centralize DNS?
    - single point of failure
    - traffic volume
    - distant centralized database
    - maintenance
    - does not scale

### Size of DNS

1. Billions of simple records in _distributed databases_.
2. Handle _trillions_ of queries every day
3. Organizationally, physically decentralized.
4. Security problems.

### Hierarchy of DNS

Root DNS servers
- `.com` DNS
    - `yahoo.com` DNS
    - ...
- `.org` DNS
    - `pbs.org` DNS
    - ...
- `.edu` DNS
    - `nyu.edu` DNS
    - ...

1. Client queries from root onwards, in a tree-like fashion.
2. **Top-Level Domain (TLD) servers** are responsible for neutral and top-level country domains.
3. **Authoritative DNS servers** are managed by organizations.

### DNS Name Resolution

1. Iterated query
    - Contacted server replies with name of server to contact.
    - Forwards to next server.
2. Recursive query
    - Puts burden on servers higher up in hierarchy.
    - Iterative preferred since load increases higher in hierarchy.

### Caching DNS Information

1. Once any name server learns mapping, it _caches_ mapping and _immediately_ returns cached mapping when requested again.
    - Improves response
    - Cache entries timed out with a TTL
    - TLD servers typically cached in local name servers.
2. Cached entries may be _out-of-date_.
    - If named host changes IP, may not be known till TTL.
    - We make a best-effort name-to-address translation.
