---
title: "CS3530 2023-09-06"
date: 2023-09-06T09:04:33Z
draft: false
toc: true
---

## Video Streaming and CDNs

1. Video traffic is the major consumer of Internet bandwidth.
2. Challenges are:
    * Scale and reach.
    * Heterogeneity (different capabilities of different devices and users).
3. One solution is to use a _distributed_, application-level infrastructure.

### Mutlimedia

1. A **video** is a sequence of images displayed at a constant rate.
2. A digital **image** is a two-dimensional array of pixels, where each pixel is represented by _bits_.
3. **Coding** is used to reduce redundnacy within and between images to decrease the number of bits used to encode the image.
    * In _spatial_ coding, instead of encoding repeated values, two values are sent: the color value and number of repeated values.
    * In _temporal_ coding, the difference between two frames can be encoded.

### Streaming Stored Video
1. Challenges:
    * Server-to-client _bandwidth_ may vary over time, with changing congestion levels.
    * Packet loss, congestion delays will delay playout or reduce video quality.
2. The graph between cumulative data and time is a staircase graph, when video is recorded, sent and received.
3. In streaming, early part of video is played by client, while server is sending later part of video.
4. **Continuous Playout Constraint**: during client video playout, playout timing must match original timing.
    * Network delays are variable (called **jitter**). 
5. _Client-side buffer_ matches this constraint, compensating for network delays and jitter.

### DASH
1. Stands for _Dynamic, Adaptive Streaming over HTTP_.
2. Server does the following:
    * Divide video file into chunks.
    * Encode each chunk at multiple different rates.
    * Different rate encodings stored in different files.
    * Files replicated in various CDN nodes.
    * A **manifest file** provides URLs for different chunks.

3. Client does the following:
    * Periodically estimates server-to-client bandwidth.
    * Consulting manifest, requests one chunk at a time. 
        - It chooses maximum coding rate sustainable given network conditions.
        - It can choose different coding rates at different points in time and from different servers.

4. The client is _intelligent_. It determines:
    * when to request chunk.
    * what encoding rate to request.
    * where to request chunk.

5. Ultimately, streaming video is a combination of encoding, DASH, and playout buffering.


## Content Distribution Networks (CDNs)
A challenge of streaming video is how to stream content to many users _simultaneously_.
1. Challenges of using a single server.
    * Single point of failure.
    * Point of network congestion.
    * Long and congested path to faraway clients.
    It doesn't _scale_.

2. Instead, storing multiple copies of videos at multiple geographically distributed sites (which is a CDN). 
    * _Enter deep_: CDN servers are pushed deep into many access networks, such as Akamai.
    * _Bring home_: smaller number of larger clusters in PoPs near access nets, such as Limelight.

3. When client requests content, service provider provides manifest, and client retrieves from different servers.

4. **Over The Top (OTT)** services face the following challenges:
    * Content placement in CDN nodes.
