---
title: "CS3530 2023-08-29"
date: 2023-08-29T05:34:50Z
draft: false
toc: true
---

## Web Caches

1. The goal of web caches is to satisfy client requests _without_ involving origin server.
2. The user can configure browsers to point to local web caches.
3. Browser sends all HTTP requests to this web cache.
    - If object is present in cache, cache returns object to client.
    - Else cache requests object from origin server, caches requested object and returns it.
4. These are typically known as **proxy servers**.
5. They act as both client and server.
    - Server for original client request.
    - Client for origin server.
6. Server tells cache about object's allowable caching in response header.
7. Advantages:
    - Reduce response time for client request, as cache is closer to client.
    - Reduce traffic on an enterprise access link.
    - Internet is dense with caches, and enables _poor_ content providers to deliver their content effictively.

### An Example

1. Scenario:
    - Access link rate \\(= 1.54 \textrm{ Mbps}\\).
    - LAN rate \\(= 1 \textrm{ Gbps}\\).
    - RTT from institutional router to server \\(= 2 \textrm{ s}\\).
    - Web object size \\(= 100 \textrm{ Kb}\\).
    - Average requests rate from browsers to origin servers \\(= 15 \textrm{ s}^{-1}\\).
        - Thus, average data rate to browsers \\(= 1.50 \textrm{ Mbps}\\).

2. Performance:
    - Access link utilization \\(= \frac{1.50}{1.54} = 0.97\\).
        - Large queueing delays at high utilization
    - LAN utilization \\(= \frac{1.50}{1000} = 0.015\\).
    - End-to-end delay is of the order of minutes.

3. Options:
    - Buy a faster link, expensive! But end-to-end delay is dictated by RTT.
    - Buy a local web cache, cheaper. Recalculate the following based on cache hit rate:
        - Access link utilization (factor in hit rate).
        - Average end-to-end delay (usually neglect requests satisfied at cache).
