---
title: "CS3530 2023-09-12: Transport Layer"
date: 2023-09-12T05:29:25Z
draft: false
toc: true
---

## Transport Services and Protocols

1. Provide **logical communication** between different hosts running application process.
2. Actions in end systems:
    * Sender: Breaks message to **segments**, pass to network layer.
    * Receiver: Reassembles segments to messages, pass to application layer.
3. Two transport layer protocols: _TCP_ and _UDP_.
4. **Note**: network layer provides logical communication between _hosts_, but transport layer provides logical communication between _processes_ and relies on network layer services.

## Principal Internet Transport Protocols

1. TCP and UDP does not provide:
    * delay guarantees
    * bandwidth guarantees

## Multiplexing and Demultiplexing

1. Host receives IP datagrams, containing source and destination IP addresses.
2. Datagram carries one transport-layer segment, which has source and destination port number.
3. Host uses IP address and port number to direct segment to appropriate socket.

### Connectionless Demultiplexing
Connectionless demultiplexing requires:
1. Specification of host-local port.
2. When creating datagram, each packet contains destination IP address and port number.
3. When receiving host gets UDP segment, it uses the port number of that segment to direct to appropriate UDP socket. Socket is dependent on port number of host process.

### Connection-oriented Demultiplexing

1. TCP socket identified uniquely by:
    * source IP address.
    * destination IP address.
    * source port number.
    * destination port number.
2. Demultiplexing happens using these four parameters.
3. Multiplexing and demultiplexing happens at _all_ layers.

## UDP: User Datagram Protocol

1. _No frills, barebones_ protocol.
2. Provides _best effort_ service, UDP segments may be lost or delivered out-of-order.
3. Connectionless:
    * No handshaking.
    * Each UDP data segment independent of others.
4. Advantages:
    * No connection establishment (can add to RTT).
    * Simple, small header size.
    * No congestion control: can transmit at any rate, even in the face of congestion.
5. Use cases:
    * HTTP/3 (reliability and congestion control added at application layer)
    * DNS
    * Streaming/multimedia apps
